Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: calcium,
phosphate homeostasis and the parathyroid glands.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the distribution and importance of calcium in the body.
Calcium is one of the most important and tightly-regulated ions in the body,
with vital functions, and an understanding of its distribution and of why its
plasma level must be controlled is the foundation of the subject,
so it is worth setting out.
Calcium is abundant in the body, but very unevenly distributed:
the great majority — around ninety-nine per cent — is in the bones,
as the mineral that gives them their strength,
also serving as a vast store of calcium;
only a tiny fraction is in the extracellular fluid and the cells,
yet this fraction is critical.
In the plasma, the calcium exists in three forms: about half is ionised — the free,
biologically-active form; much of the rest is bound to plasma proteins,
chiefly albumin; and a small amount is complexed with anions.
It is the ionised calcium that is physiologically active and regulated.
The importance of calcium, and of the close regulation of the ionised plasma
calcium, lies in its many vital functions:
it is essential for the normal excitability of nerve and muscle,
for muscle contraction, for the release of neurotransmitters and the function of
synapses, for blood clotting, as an intracellular signal, and for many enzymes;
both a high and a low plasma calcium disturb these functions,
particularly the excitability of nerve and muscle.
So calcium is mostly stored in bone, which also serves as its reservoir,
with only a tiny but critical fraction in the extracellular fluid;
in the plasma it exists as the active ionised form, protein-bound calcium,
and complexed calcium, the ionised form being regulated;
and it is vital for the excitability of nerve and muscle, muscle contraction,
neurotransmission, clotting and intracellular signalling — functions requiring its
plasma level to be closely controlled.
Describe the synthesis, control and actions of parathyroid hormone.
Parathyroid hormone is the principal hormone regulating the plasma calcium,
raising it when it falls, and an understanding of its control and actions is
central to calcium physiology, so it is worth describing.
Parathyroid hormone is a peptide hormone,
secreted by the four small parathyroid glands, behind the thyroid.
Its secretion is controlled directly by the plasma ionised calcium,
which the parathyroid cells sense through a calcium-sensing receptor:
a fall in the plasma calcium stimulates the secretion of parathyroid hormone,
and a rise inhibits it — so the hormone is secreted to correct a falling calcium.
Its overall action is to raise the plasma calcium,
which it does by acting on three targets. On bone,
it stimulates the resorption of bone,
releasing calcium and phosphate from the bony store into the blood.
On the kidney, it increases the reabsorption of calcium,
reducing its loss in the urine; and it promotes the excretion of phosphate.
Also on the kidney, it stimulates the activation of vitamin D — the final
hydroxylation — which in turn increases the absorption of calcium from the gut.
So, by these combined actions, it raises the plasma calcium.
So parathyroid hormone, from the parathyroid glands,
is secreted in response to a fall in the plasma ionised calcium,
sensed by a calcium-sensing receptor;
and it raises the plasma calcium by stimulating bone resorption to release calcium,
by increasing renal calcium reabsorption while promoting phosphate excretion,
and by stimulating the activation of vitamin D to increase gut calcium absorption —
the principal hormone correcting a falling calcium.
Describe the formation and actions of vitamin D.
Vitamin D, in its active form, is a hormone essential for calcium balance,
particularly for the absorption of calcium from the gut,
and its formation — involving several organs — and its actions are worth describing
as the second key element of calcium regulation.
Vitamin D is obtained from the diet and, importantly,
formed in the skin by the action of ultraviolet light.
But it must be activated by two successive hydroxylations to become the active
hormone.
The first hydroxylation occurs in the liver; the second, and regulated,
hydroxylation occurs in the kidney, producing the active form, calcitriol.
This final renal activation is stimulated by parathyroid hormone,
linking the two hormones.
The principal action of active vitamin D is on the gut,
where it promotes the absorption of calcium — and phosphate — from the diet;
this is its essential role, for without adequate vitamin D,
calcium cannot be absorbed sufficiently, however much is eaten.
It also acts on bone, permitting its normal mineralisation,
and has some renal and other actions. Its overall effect is to raise the
availability of calcium and phosphate for the body and for bone.
Its deficiency causes the defective bone mineralisation of rickets and osteomalacia.
So vitamin D, from the diet and formed in the skin by ultraviolet light,
is activated by hydroxylation in the liver and then,
under the control of parathyroid hormone, in the kidney, to active calcitriol;
which acts chiefly on the gut to promote the absorption of calcium and phosphate,
and permits the normal mineralisation of bone — essential for calcium balance,
its deficiency causing rickets and osteomalacia — the second key element of calcium
regulation.
Describe the integrated regulation of the plasma calcium.
The plasma ionised calcium is held remarkably constant by the integrated action of
parathyroid hormone and vitamin D, with calcitonin playing a minor part,
and drawing together how the system responds to a change in calcium illustrates the
regulation, so it is worth setting out.
The system maintains the plasma ionised calcium within narrow limits,
chiefly through parathyroid hormone and vitamin D.
Consider the response to a fall in the plasma calcium.
The fall is sensed by the parathyroid glands,
which increase their secretion of parathyroid hormone.
The parathyroid hormone acts rapidly to raise the calcium: mobilising it from bone,
and conserving it in the kidney; and, more slowly,
stimulating the renal activation of vitamin D,
which increases the absorption of calcium from the gut.
These combined actions — from bone, kidney and gut,
the three sources — restore the plasma calcium,
whereupon the parathyroid hormone secretion subsides.
A rise in calcium has the opposite effect, suppressing parathyroid hormone,
and stimulating the minor calcitonin.
The system thus draws on the three organs that handle calcium — the bone,
the great store; the kidney, controlling its excretion and activating vitamin D;
and the gut, controlling its absorption — coordinated by the two hormones.
So the plasma calcium is regulated chiefly by parathyroid hormone and vitamin D:
a fall in calcium stimulating parathyroid hormone,
which mobilises calcium from bone, conserves it in the kidney,
and activates vitamin D to increase gut absorption, restoring the level;
a rise suppressing parathyroid hormone and stimulating calcitonin;
the system coordinating the bone, kidney and gut — an integrated regulation holding
the plasma calcium constant.
Describe the regulation of phosphate.
Phosphate is handled alongside calcium and by the same hormones,
but its regulation is less tight and in some respects opposite,
so it is worth describing briefly, since the two are intimately linked.
Phosphate, like calcium, is mostly in the bone,
with a smaller amount in the extracellular fluid and a large amount within the
cells, where it is important in energy metabolism and many molecules.
The plasma phosphate is regulated, but less precisely than the calcium.
It is handled by the same hormones,
but their effects on phosphate differ from those on calcium.
Parathyroid hormone, while it raises the plasma calcium,
tends to lower the plasma phosphate, because,
although it releases both calcium and phosphate from bone,
its strong action of promoting phosphate excretion by the kidney predominates,
producing a net phosphate loss — a phosphaturic action.
Vitamin D increases the absorption of both calcium and phosphate from the gut,
raising the phosphate. The kidney is the main site of phosphate regulation,
through the control of its reabsorption.
The handling of phosphate is disturbed in renal disease,
in which phosphate is retained, contributing to the disturbances of calcium and
bone.
So phosphate is mostly in bone and the cells, important in energy metabolism;
its plasma level regulated less tightly than calcium,
by the same hormones with differing effects — parathyroid hormone lowering the
plasma phosphate by its predominant phosphaturic renal action,
while vitamin D raises it by promoting gut absorption — the kidney being the main
site of regulation, and phosphate retention in renal disease contributing to bone
disorders; phosphate handled alongside, and linked to, calcium.
Describe the features and anaesthetic relevance of hypocalcaemia.
Hypocalcaemia, a low plasma ionised calcium,
produces characteristic features following from the role of calcium in the
excitability of nerve and muscle, and it has anaesthetic relevance,
so it is worth describing.
A low ionised calcium increases the excitability of nerve and muscle,
because calcium normally stabilises the excitable membranes;
so its lack makes them hyperexcitable.
The features are therefore those of neuromuscular hyperexcitability — tetany:
tingling, particularly around the mouth and in the hands and feet;
muscle cramps and spasms, with the characteristic carpopedal spasm; and,
in severe cases, generalised tetany, seizures, and, dangerously,
spasm of the larynx — laryngospasm — and effects on the heart,
with a prolonged QT interval and risk of arrhythmias and impaired cardiac function.
The causes include disorders of the parathyroid glands — notably their inadvertent
damage or removal during thyroid or neck surgery — vitamin D deficiency,
and others; a fall in the ionised calcium can also be precipitated by alkalosis,
which reduces the ionised fraction.
Its anaesthetic relevance includes the risk after neck surgery,
the cardiovascular effects, the laryngospasm,
and the interaction with neuromuscular function; it is treated by giving calcium.
So hypocalcaemia, by increasing the excitability of nerve and muscle,
causes tetany — perioral and peripheral tingling, cramps, carpopedal spasm, and,
severely, seizures, laryngospasm and cardiac effects with a prolonged QT interval;
its causes including parathyroid damage in neck surgery and vitamin D deficiency,
and precipitation by alkalosis; of anaesthetic relevance for the laryngospasm,
cardiac effects and post-surgical risk,
and treated with calcium — a syndrome following from the role of calcium in
membrane excitability.
Describe the features and anaesthetic relevance of hypercalcaemia.
Hypercalcaemia, a high plasma calcium, produces a clinical picture that is,
broadly, the opposite of hypocalcaemia,
with reduced excitability and other effects, and it too has anaesthetic relevance,
so it is worth describing.
A high calcium reduces the excitability of nerve and muscle,
and has effects on several systems.
The features are often summarised as affecting the bones, stones,
abdominal groans and psychic moans: effects on bone,
where the underlying disease may cause bone changes;
renal stones and the effects of the high calcium on the kidney,
including a polyuria, as the high calcium impairs the kidney's concentrating
ability, causing dehydration; abdominal and gastrointestinal effects, with nausea,
vomiting, constipation; and neuropsychiatric effects — lethargy, confusion, and,
in severe cases, coma.
There are cardiovascular effects, with a shortened QT interval and arrhythmias.
The common causes are overactivity of the parathyroid glands — hyperparathyroidism
— and malignancy.
Its anaesthetic relevance includes the dehydration and volume depletion,
which should be corrected — rehydration being a mainstay of treatment;
the cardiac effects; the neuromuscular and conscious-level effects;
and the care needed in severe hypercalcaemia, which is a medical emergency.
So hypercalcaemia, reducing the excitability of nerve and muscle,
causes effects on the bones, renal stones and polyuria with dehydration,
gastrointestinal upset, and neuropsychiatric disturbance,
with cardiac effects and a shortened QT interval;
commonly from hyperparathyroidism or malignancy;
of anaesthetic relevance for the dehydration to be corrected, the cardiac effects,
and the conscious-level effects — the counterpart of hypocalcaemia,
following from the role of calcium in excitability.
Pull it together: how is the plasma calcium kept constant, and why does it matter?
I would draw the calcium together around the plasma ionised calcium as a
tightly-regulated variable, kept constant by a hormonal system drawing on three
organs, because its constancy is essential to the excitability of nerve and muscle
and to many other functions.
Why it matters comes first: the ionised calcium is vital for the normal
excitability of nerve and muscle, for muscle contraction, neurotransmission,
clotting and intracellular signalling,
and both a high and a low level disturb these — a low calcium causing the
hyperexcitability of tetany, with its laryngospasm and seizures,
and a high calcium causing reduced excitability with its renal,
gastrointestinal and neuropsychiatric effects.
So the level must be held constant.
This is achieved chiefly by parathyroid hormone and vitamin D,
drawing on the three organs that handle calcium: the bone, the great store,
from which calcium can be mobilised; the gut,
from which it is absorbed under the control of vitamin D; and the kidney,
which controls its excretion and activates vitamin D.
A fall in calcium stimulates parathyroid hormone, which mobilises it from bone,
conserves it in the kidney, and activates vitamin D to absorb more from the gut,
restoring the level; a rise does the reverse, with the minor help of calcitonin.
So the plasma ionised calcium is kept constant because its constancy is essential
to the excitability of nerve and muscle and to neurotransmission,
clotting and signalling; achieved by parathyroid hormone and vitamin D drawing on
the bone, gut and kidney to mobilise,
absorb and conserve calcium as needed — a tightly-regulated system whose
disturbances, hypo- and hypercalcaemia, cause characteristic,
anaesthetically-relevant syndromes.
Describe the effect of plasma protein and pH on the ionised calcium.
The physiologically active calcium is the ionised fraction,
and this is affected by the plasma protein concentration and by the pH,
an understanding of which is important for the correct interpretation of calcium
measurements and is of anaesthetic relevance.
About half the plasma calcium is ionised — the active form — and much of the rest
is bound to protein, chiefly albumin, in equilibrium with the ionised.
Two factors alter the relationship between the total and the ionised calcium.
First, the plasma protein, chiefly albumin: since much calcium is protein-bound,
a change in the albumin changes the total calcium without necessarily changing the
active ionised calcium — a low albumin lowers the total calcium,
but the ionised may be normal; so the total calcium must be interpreted in the
light of the albumin, or corrected for it, or the ionised calcium measured directly.
Second, the pH: the binding of calcium to albumin depends on the pH,
because hydrogen ions compete with calcium for binding sites on the albumin.
So acidosis, with more hydrogen ions, displaces calcium from the albumin,
raising the ionised calcium; while alkalosis, with fewer hydrogen ions,
allows more calcium to bind the albumin, lowering the ionised calcium.
This is clinically important: alkalosis — as from hyperventilation — can lower the
ionised calcium enough to cause the symptoms of hypocalcaemia, tetany,
even when the total calcium is normal.
So the active ionised calcium is affected by the plasma protein and the pH:
a change in albumin alters the total calcium without necessarily the ionised,
so the total must be interpreted with the albumin or the ionised measured;
and the pH alters the binding — acidosis raising and alkalosis lowering the ionised
calcium, so that alkalosis, as from hyperventilation,
can cause hypocalcaemic tetany with a normal total calcium — points important in
interpreting calcium and of anaesthetic relevance.
Describe the structure and turnover of bone in relation to calcium.
Bone is not only the structural framework of the body but the great reservoir of
calcium, and it is in a state of constant turnover,
the understanding of which is relevant to calcium balance and to bone disease,
so it is worth describing.
Bone consists of a protein matrix, mainly collagen,
impregnated with mineral — chiefly a calcium-phosphate salt — which gives it its
hardness and which constitutes the body's vast store of calcium and phosphate.
Bone is not inert but is in a state of constant remodelling — being continuously
broken down and reformed — by two opposing cell types: the osteoclasts,
which resorb bone, dissolving the mineral and matrix and releasing the calcium and
phosphate into the blood; and the osteoblasts, which form new bone,
laying down matrix and mineral, taking calcium and phosphate from the blood.
The balance of these processes determines the bone mass,
and their activity is the means by which calcium is exchanged between the bone
store and the blood.
This turnover is regulated by the calcium-regulating hormones:
parathyroid hormone stimulates bone resorption, mobilising calcium;
vitamin D is needed for normal mineralisation;
and other hormones and factors influence it.
The turnover allows bone to serve as a buffer and store for calcium,
and to be repaired and adapted.
So bone is a collagen matrix impregnated with calcium-phosphate mineral — the
body's great calcium store — in constant remodelling by the osteoclasts,
which resorb bone and release calcium, and the osteoblasts,
which form bone and take up calcium; this turnover,
regulated by parathyroid hormone, vitamin D and other factors,
exchanging calcium between the bone and the blood and allowing bone to serve as a
calcium reservoir — relevant to calcium balance and bone disease.
Describe primary hyperparathyroidism.
Primary hyperparathyroidism, an excess of parathyroid hormone from the parathyroid
glands themselves, is a common cause of hypercalcaemia,
and its understanding follows from the actions of parathyroid hormone,
so it is worth describing.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is an excess secretion of parathyroid hormone arising
from a disorder of the parathyroid glands themselves — most often a benign tumour,
an adenoma, of one gland, or sometimes enlargement of all.
Because the excess hormone arises from the gland autonomously,
it is not suppressed by the resulting high calcium — the normal feedback fails.
The consequences follow from the actions of parathyroid hormone:
it raises the plasma calcium — by mobilising it from bone,
conserving it in the kidney, and activating vitamin D to absorb more from the gut —
causing hypercalcaemia, the principal feature; and it lowers the plasma phosphate,
by its phosphaturic action.
The features are therefore those of hypercalcaemia — which may be mild and detected
on testing, or cause the symptoms of bones, stones,
abdominal groans and psychic moans — and effects on the bone from the excess
hormone, and renal effects, including stones.
It is distinguished from the hypercalcaemia of malignancy, the other common cause,
by the inappropriately raised parathyroid hormone — which is suppressed in
malignancy. It is treated by removing the overactive gland.
So primary hyperparathyroidism is an autonomous excess of parathyroid hormone,
usually from an adenoma, not suppressed by the high calcium;
raising the plasma calcium — causing hypercalcaemia with its features — and
lowering the phosphate, with bone and renal effects;
distinguished from malignancy by the inappropriately raised parathyroid hormone,
and treated by removing the gland — a common cause of hypercalcaemia following from
the actions of parathyroid hormone.
Describe the consequences of inadvertent damage to the parathyroid glands during
neck surgery.
The parathyroid glands are small and lie close to the thyroid,
so they are at risk during thyroid and other neck surgery,
and the resulting hypocalcaemia is an important complication of anaesthetic and
surgical relevance, so it is worth describing.
The four small parathyroid glands lie behind the thyroid gland,
and their blood supply is delicate; during thyroid surgery,
particularly the removal of the whole gland,
the parathyroids may be inadvertently damaged, removed,
or have their blood supply compromised.
The consequence is a deficiency of parathyroid hormone — hypoparathyroidism —
which, by the loss of the hormone's calcium-raising actions,
causes the plasma calcium to fall, hypocalcaemia.
This typically develops in the hours to days after the surgery,
as the hormone level falls.
The hypocalcaemia causes the features of neuromuscular hyperexcitability —
tingling, particularly around the mouth and in the hands, muscle cramps and spasms,
and, in severe cases, tetany, seizures and, dangerously,
laryngospasm — and the cardiac effects.
The risk means that the calcium should be monitored after such surgery,
and the hypocalcaemia treated with calcium, and vitamin D if needed.
The hypoparathyroidism may be transient, if the glands recover, or permanent.
So inadvertent damage to, or removal of,
the parathyroid glands during thyroid or neck surgery causes hypoparathyroidism,
with a fall in the plasma calcium over the following hours to days;
the hypocalcaemia causing perioral and peripheral tingling, cramps, and, severely,
tetany, seizures and laryngospasm; so the calcium is monitored after such surgery
and the hypocalcaemia treated with calcium and vitamin D — an important
complication of neck surgery, of anaesthetic relevance.
Describe the treatment of severe hypercalcaemia and severe hypocalcaemia.
The acute, severe disturbances of calcium — severe hypercalcaemia and severe
hypocalcaemia — are medical emergencies requiring urgent treatment,
the principles of which follow from the physiology, so they are worth describing.
Severe hypercalcaemia is a dangerous emergency,
with the risk of cardiac and neurological consequences.
Its treatment rests on several measures.
The most important and immediate is rehydration with intravenous fluid,
because the hypercalcaemia causes a polyuria and dehydration,
and the volume depletion further impairs the renal excretion of calcium;
restoring the volume promotes the renal excretion of calcium.
Further measures reduce the calcium:
drugs that inhibit the bone resorption releasing the calcium — the bisphosphonates
— are a mainstay, though they take a day or two to act;
and the underlying cause is treated.
Severe hypocalcaemia, with tetany, seizures or laryngospasm, is also an emergency,
treated by the urgent intravenous administration of calcium, given carefully,
to raise the ionised calcium and relieve the neuromuscular hyperexcitability;
the underlying cause is then addressed,
with oral calcium and vitamin D for longer-term correction,
and any contributing factor, such as a low magnesium or an alkalosis, corrected.
So severe hypercalcaemia is treated urgently by rehydration with intravenous fluid
— the most important measure, restoring the volume and promoting renal calcium
excretion — and by bisphosphonates to inhibit bone resorption,
with treatment of the cause; while severe hypocalcaemia with tetany or laryngospasm
is treated by urgent, careful intravenous calcium,
followed by oral calcium and vitamin D and correction of contributing factors —
emergencies treated on principles following from the calcium physiology.
Describe the disturbances of calcium and bone in chronic kidney disease.
Chronic kidney disease causes a characteristic and complex disturbance of calcium,
phosphate and bone, the understanding of which draws together the roles of the
kidney in calcium regulation, so it is worth describing.
The kidney is central to calcium balance — it activates vitamin D and excretes
phosphate — so its failure disturbs the whole system.
As the kidney fails, several disturbances arise and interact.
The kidney cannot adequately excrete phosphate, so phosphate is retained,
raising the plasma phosphate. It cannot perform the final activation of vitamin D,
so active vitamin D falls, reducing the absorption of calcium from the gut and
tending to lower the plasma calcium.
The low calcium, the high phosphate,
and the low vitamin D all stimulate the parathyroid glands,
causing a secondary hyperparathyroidism — a raised parathyroid hormone driven by
the disturbance, which over time may become severe and autonomous.
The raised parathyroid hormone, with the disordered calcium,
phosphate and vitamin D, causes the bone disease — a mixture of effects on the bone
— and contributes to the calcification of the vessels and tissues.
This whole disorder is the chronic-kidney-disease mineral and bone disorder.
It is managed by controlling the phosphate with diet and phosphate binders,
giving active vitamin D, and managing the hyperparathyroidism.
So chronic kidney disease disturbs calcium and bone through the loss of the renal
activation of vitamin D and excretion of phosphate: phosphate is retained,
active vitamin D falls, calcium absorption falls,
and a secondary hyperparathyroidism develops,
together causing renal bone disease and vascular calcification — the mineral and
bone disorder; managed by controlling phosphate,
giving vitamin D and treating the hyperparathyroidism — a disturbance drawing
together the renal roles in calcium regulation.
Describe the functions of calcium in the body in more detail.
Calcium has a remarkable range of essential functions,
both structural and as a signalling ion,
and setting these out more fully explains why its plasma level must be so closely
regulated, so it is worth describing. Calcium serves functions of two broad kinds.
Structurally, as the mineral of bone,
it provides the hardness and strength of the skeleton, and a vast store of calcium.
In the fluids and cells, the ionised calcium has many critical functions:
it is essential for the normal excitability of nerve and muscle membranes,
stabilising them — so both a high and a low calcium disturb their excitability;
it is essential for muscle contraction, in all three muscle types,
as the trigger coupling excitation to contraction;
it is essential for the release of neurotransmitters at synapses, and of hormones,
the calcium entry triggering the secretion; it is a vital intracellular signal,
or second messenger, mediating the response of cells to many signals;
it is essential for blood clotting, a required factor in the coagulation cascade;
and it is a cofactor for many enzymes.
So the close regulation of the ionised calcium is necessary because so many vital
functions depend on it.
So calcium serves essential functions: structurally,
as the mineral giving bone its strength and the body its calcium store; and,
as the ionised form, in the excitability of nerve and muscle,
in muscle contraction, in the release of neurotransmitters and hormones,
as an intracellular signal, in blood clotting,
and as an enzyme cofactor — a range of vital functions explaining why the plasma
calcium must be so closely regulated.
Describe the regulation of parathyroid hormone secretion by the calcium-sensing
receptor.
The secretion of parathyroid hormone is controlled directly and finely by the
plasma ionised calcium, through the calcium-sensing receptor,
and an understanding of this mechanism is worth having,
as it is central to calcium regulation and a target of drugs.
The parathyroid glands must sense the plasma calcium so as to secrete the hormone
appropriately — more when the calcium is low,
less when it is high — and they do this through the calcium-sensing receptor on the
surface of the parathyroid cells, which detects the concentration of ionised
calcium in the surrounding fluid.
The receptor is a metabotropic, G-protein-coupled receptor,
and it works in the inhibitory direction: when the calcium is high,
the receptor is activated and inhibits the secretion of parathyroid hormone;
when the calcium falls, the receptor is less activated, the inhibition is relieved,
and the secretion increases.
So the gland continuously adjusts its output to the calcium,
in a sensitive negative feedback holding the calcium stable.
This receptor is the target of drugs: the calcimimetic drugs, such as cinacalcet,
activate it, mimicking a high calcium,
and so suppress parathyroid hormone secretion — used in hyperparathyroidism;
mutations of the receptor cause inherited disorders of calcium.
So parathyroid hormone secretion is regulated by the calcium-sensing receptor on
the parathyroid cells, which detects the ionised calcium and,
when activated by a high calcium, inhibits the hormone's secretion,
the inhibition being relieved when the calcium falls — a sensitive negative
feedback; the receptor being the target of the calcimimetic drugs that suppress
parathyroid hormone in hyperparathyroidism — a mechanism central to calcium
regulation.
Describe vitamin D deficiency and its consequences.
Vitamin D deficiency, by impairing the absorption of calcium and the mineralisation
of bone, causes important disorders,
and an understanding of these follows from the actions of vitamin D,
so they are worth describing.
Vitamin D is essential for the absorption of calcium from the gut and for the
normal mineralisation of bone, so its deficiency impairs both.
Deficiency arises from inadequate exposure to sunlight — the main source,
through the skin — inadequate dietary intake, and disorders of its activation,
as in renal disease. The consequences differ with age.
In children, whose bones are still growing, deficiency causes rickets:
the failure of mineralisation of the growing bone makes it soft and deformed,
with the characteristic skeletal changes.
In adults, deficiency causes osteomalacia:
the failure of mineralisation makes the bone soft and weak, causing bone pain,
weakness, and a tendency to fracture.
In both, the impaired calcium absorption tends to lower the plasma calcium,
which stimulates parathyroid hormone — a secondary hyperparathyroidism — acting to
maintain the plasma calcium, often near normal, but at the expense of the bone,
worsening the bone disease.
It is treated by giving vitamin D.
So vitamin D deficiency, from inadequate sunlight, diet or activation,
impairs calcium absorption and bone mineralisation:
causing rickets in the growing child, with soft, deformed bones,
and osteomalacia in the adult, with soft, painful bones;
and a secondary hyperparathyroidism that maintains the calcium at the expense of
the bone; treated by giving vitamin D — disorders following from the actions of
vitamin D.
Describe the handling of magnesium and its relationship to calcium.
Magnesium is another important divalent ion,
handled alongside calcium and interacting with it and with parathyroid hormone,
and an awareness of its relationship to calcium is worth having,
as magnesium disturbances affect calcium regulation.
Magnesium, like calcium, is predominantly an intracellular and skeletal ion,
with a smaller plasma fraction, important in many enzyme reactions and in the
function of nerve and muscle; it is handled by the gut and the kidney,
the kidney being the main regulator of its plasma level.
Magnesium interacts with calcium regulation in important ways:
it is needed for the normal secretion of parathyroid hormone and for the normal
response of the tissues to it, so a severe deficiency of magnesium impairs the
secretion and action of parathyroid hormone,
causing a hypocalcaemia that is resistant to treatment until the magnesium is
replaced — an important and easily-missed cause of refractory hypocalcaemia.
Magnesium also affects the excitability of nerve and muscle,
so its disturbances cause neuromuscular effects,
and it is used therapeutically — in certain arrhythmias, in pre-eclampsia,
and in asthma.
So magnesium is a predominantly intracellular and skeletal ion,
important in enzymes and in nerve and muscle, regulated chiefly by the kidney;
it interacts with calcium regulation,
being needed for the secretion and action of parathyroid hormone — so severe
magnesium deficiency causes a hypocalcaemia refractory until the magnesium is
replaced — and it affects neuromuscular excitability;
a divalent ion handled alongside, and interacting with, calcium.
Describe the causes of hypercalcaemia and their distinction.
Hypercalcaemia has several causes, of which two are much the commonest,
and distinguishing them — chiefly by the parathyroid hormone level — is a useful
exercise following from the calcium physiology, so it is worth describing.
The great majority of hypercalcaemia is due to two causes:
primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy,
distinguished chiefly by the parathyroid hormone level interpreted against the high
calcium.
In primary hyperparathyroidism, the excess parathyroid hormone is the cause:
it is autonomously produced and not suppressed by the high calcium,
so the parathyroid hormone is inappropriately raised, or in the upper normal range,
despite the hypercalcaemia — abnormal, since a high calcium should suppress it;
this is typically a chronic, often mild hypercalcaemia.
In the hypercalcaemia of malignancy,
the high calcium arises from the cancer — substances secreted by the tumour that
mimic parathyroid hormone, or the destruction of bone — and the calcium,
being high from another cause, appropriately suppresses the normal parathyroid
glands, so the parathyroid hormone is low; this is often a more acute,
severe hypercalcaemia in a patient with known malignancy.
Other, rarer causes include excess vitamin D.
So hypercalcaemia is most often due to primary hyperparathyroidism or malignancy,
distinguished chiefly by the parathyroid hormone:
inappropriately raised in primary hyperparathyroidism,
where the autonomous hormone is the cause; and suppressed in malignancy,
where the calcium is raised by tumour effects and appropriately suppresses the
glands — a distinction following from the calcium physiology,
with rarer causes such as vitamin D excess.
Describe the perioperative management of calcium disturbances.
Disturbances of calcium are relevant in the perioperative period,
both as pre-existing conditions and as complications of surgery,
and their management draws together the calcium physiology,
so it is worth describing as a practical application. Several situations arise.
A pre-existing hypercalcaemia, as from hyperparathyroidism or malignancy,
should be recognised and, if significant,
corrected before surgery — chiefly by rehydration,
since these patients are often volume-depleted,
with attention to the cardiac effects;
severe hypercalcaemia is a contraindication to elective surgery until treated.
A pre-existing hypocalcaemia should be corrected and its cause addressed.
The most important surgically-related disturbance is the hypocalcaemia following
thyroid or parathyroid surgery, from damage to the parathyroid glands:
the calcium is monitored after such surgery,
and a falling or symptomatic hypocalcaemia treated with calcium.
Calcium disturbances also arise in other relevant settings:
a fall in the ionised calcium can be caused by alkalosis, as from hyperventilation,
and by the rapid transfusion of large volumes of blood,
whose anticoagulant binds calcium — so the ionised calcium is monitored and
replaced during massive transfusion.
So calcium disturbances are managed perioperatively:
a pre-existing hypercalcaemia corrected chiefly by rehydration before surgery,
severe hypercalcaemia deferring elective surgery;
a pre-existing hypocalcaemia corrected;
the hypocalcaemia after thyroid or parathyroid surgery monitored and treated with
calcium; and the ionised calcium monitored and replaced during massive transfusion,
whose anticoagulant binds calcium, and watched in alkalosis — a practical
application drawing together the calcium physiology.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Calcium is ~99% in bone (structural + a vast reservoir);
only a tiny but critical fraction is extracellular.
Plasma calcium exists as ionised (free, active, regulated ~half),
protein-bound (chiefly albumin), and complexed.
The ionised calcium is vital for nerve/muscle excitability, muscle contraction,
neurotransmission, clotting and intracellular signalling — so it must be closely
controlled.
Second, Parathyroid hormone (peptide,
from the parathyroid glands) is secreted when the plasma ionised calcium falls
(sensed by a calcium-sensing receptor) and RAISES it: mobilising calcium from bone,
increasing renal calcium reabsorption (while promoting phosphate excretion),
and stimulating renal activation of vitamin D (→ ↑ gut calcium absorption).
Third, Vitamin D (dietary + formed in skin by UV light) is activated by
hydroxylation in the liver then — under PTH control — the kidney,
to active calcitriol; it acts chiefly on the gut to absorb calcium and phosphate,
and permits bone mineralisation.
Deficiency → rickets/osteomalacia. Phosphate is regulated less tightly by the same
hormones with differing effects — PTH lowers plasma phosphate (predominant
phosphaturic renal action); vitamin D raises it (gut absorption).
Fourth, Integrated calcium control (chiefly PTH + vitamin D,
minor calcitonin) coordinates three organs: bone (store),
gut (absorption via vitamin D), kidney (excretion + vitamin D activation).
A fall → ↑ PTH mobilises bone calcium, conserves renal calcium,
activates vitamin D for gut absorption → level restored;
a rise suppresses PTH and stimulates calcitonin.
Fifth, Hypocalcaemia → ↑ excitability/tetany: perioral and peripheral tingling,
cramps, carpopedal spasm, seizures, laryngospasm, prolonged QT/arrhythmias (causes:
parathyroid damage in neck surgery, vitamin D deficiency;
precipitated by alkalosis) — treated with calcium.
Hypercalcaemia → ↓ excitability: bones, stones, abdominal groans, psychic moans,
polyuria with dehydration, shortened QT (causes: hyperparathyroidism,
malignancy) — rehydration is a mainstay.
Thank you. That concludes the station.